Setting up your first repository is a quick process. To get started, you’ll need to open your Terminal (on Mac/Linux) or Command Prompt/Git Bash (on Windows).
Step 1: Tell Git Who You Are

Before you create anything, Git needs to know who is making the changes. This information is attached to every "snapshot" you take.

git config --global user.name "Your Name"
git config --global user.email "youremail@example.com"

Step 2: Create Your Project Folder

Navigate to where you want your project to live and create a new directory.
Bash

mkdir my-first-project
cd my-first-project

Step 3: Initialize the Repository

This is the "magic" command. It creates a hidden .git folder inside your project. This folder tracks every change you make from now on.
Bash

git init

Step 4: The "Save" Workflow (Add & Commit)

Git doesn't automatically save every tiny keystroke; you have to tell it which changes are important. This is a two-step process:

    Create a file: Let's make a simple text file. echo "Hello Git" > index.txt

    Add it (The Staging Area): This tells Git, "I want to include this file in my next snapshot." git add index.txt

    Commit it (The Snapshot): This officially saves the snapshot to your history with a message. git commit -m "My very first commit"

Useful Commands for Checking Progress

As you work, you'll use these two commands constantly to see what’s happening:

    git status: Shows you which files have been modified, which are "staged" for a commit, and which ones Git isn't tracking yet.

    git log: Shows you a list of all the snapshots (commits) you've taken so far, including the date and your message.


Connecting your local project to GitHub is like linking your computer to a cloud-based backup and collaboration hub.

Here is how to get your code from your machine up to GitHub.
Step 1: Create a Repository on GitHub

First, you need a "home" for your code on the web.

    Log in to GitHub.

    Click the + icon in the top-right corner and select New repository.

    Give it a name (it usually matches your local folder name, e.g., my-first-project).

    Important: Leave "Initialize this repository with a README" unchecked (since we already have a local project).

    Click Create repository.

Step 2: Link Local to Remote

GitHub will now show you a page with several commands. Look for the section titled "…or push an existing repository from the command line." Back in your terminal (inside your project folder), run these three commands:

    Add the Remote: This tells your local Git the web address where it should send files.
    Bash

git remote add origin https://github.com/your-username/my-first-project.git

Rename your Branch: This ensures your main branch is named main (the modern standard).
Bash

git branch -M main

Push your Code: This "uploads" your snapshots to GitHub.
Bash

    git push -u origin main

Step 3: Verify the Connection

Refresh your GitHub repository page in your browser. You should now see your index.txt file and your commit message ("My very first commit") appearing online!
The "Daily Workflow"

Now that you are connected, your routine for saving and backing up work will look like this:

    Modify files in your folder.

    git add . (The dot adds all changed files to staging).

    git commit -m "Explain what you changed" (Save the snapshot locally).

    git push (Send those snapshots to GitHub).

Troubleshooting: Authentication

The first time you push, your computer might ask for your GitHub credentials.

    Username: Your GitHub username.

    Password: GitHub no longer accepts your actual login password for the terminal. Instead, you use a Personal Access Token (PAT) or the GitHub Desktop app to handle authentication.

Would you like me to show you how to generate a Personal Access Token so you can sign in via the terminal?


To sign in via the terminal, you need to generate a Personal Access Token (PAT). GitHub no longer accepts your standard account password for Git operations because tokens are much more secure and can be revoked individually.

There are two types of tokens: Fine-grained (more secure, recommended) and Classic. I will show you how to set up the Fine-grained version since it is the modern standard.
Step 1: Generate the Token on GitHub

    Go to Settings: Click your profile picture in the top-right corner of GitHub and select Settings.

    Developer Settings: Scroll to the bottom of the left sidebar and click Developer settings.

    Personal Access Tokens: Click Personal access tokens and select Fine-grained tokens.

    Create New: Click Generate new token.

    Configure:

        Token Name: Give it a name like "Laptop Terminal Access."

        Expiration: Set it to 30, 60, or 90 days (never setting an expiration is risky).

        Repository Access: Choose Only select repositories and pick the project you just created.

        Permissions: Click Repository permissions, find Contents, and set it to Read and write.

    Generate: Scroll to the bottom and click Generate token.

    [!CAUTION] Copy the token immediately! GitHub will never show it to you again. If you lose it, you’ll have to create a new one.

Step 2: Use the Token in your Terminal

When you run git push, the terminal will prompt you for your credentials.

    Username: Enter your GitHub username.

    Password: Paste the Personal Access Token here.

        Note: On most terminals, you won’t see any characters (not even dots) while pasting. This is normal security behavior. Just paste and hit Enter.

Step 3: Make Git Remember Your Token (Optional)

If you don't want to paste the token every single time you push, you can tell Git to remember it using a "credential helper."

    Windows: git config --global credential.helper wincred

    Mac: git config --global credential.helper osxkeychain

    Linux: git config --global credential.helper store

The next time you push and enter your token, Git will save it securely in your system's keychain.

How to Authenticate GitHub on Terminal

This video provides a clear walkthrough of the authentication process, including the transition to Fine-grained Personal Access Tokens.

Would you like to learn how to create a .gitignore file so you don't accidentally upload private files or junk to GitHub?
This is my third update!
