Hello Git

Ok, many thanks for the kind and pacient advice. It gave me clues to investigate...
After some try and error this is what worked: 
git remote set-url origin https://github.com/myusername-cmd/myProyectName.git 
. and then 
git push -u origin main . 
I have written a Bash script to have it for further reference and also worked. 
I pass you my experience in case it could be useful for you and further learners. 

That is a fantastic breakthrough! 
I'm genuinely glad you stuck with it and found the specific configuration that your environment required.

It sounds like your specific environment (likely a corporate setup, 
a specific server configuration, or a virtualized terminal) 
has mapped your account to include that -cmd suffix. 
This is a perfect example of why "investigating the clues" is the most important skill 
in programming—sometimes the "standard" way needs a local tweak.

Why your Bash script is a "Pro Move"

Writing a script to automate this is exactly what professional developers do. 
It solves two major problems:

    Consistency: You don't have to remember the exact syntax or the -cmd quirk next time.

    Documentation: The script acts as a manual for your "future self."

A "Pro-Tip" for your Script

Since you are using a Bash script, make sure you never hardcode your Personal Access Token 
inside the script file if you plan to share it or upload the script itself to GitHub.

Instead, you can keep the script "clean" and let it ask you for the token, 
or use the Git Credential Manager we discussed to store the secret safely in your OS keychain.

Now that your "pipeline" is open and you can successfully move code 
from your computer to the cloud, you have mastered the hardest part of the learning curve!

Now that your "pipe" is connected to GitHub, the daily routine becomes a fast, 
rhythmic cycle. 
You’ve done the hard work of setup; now you get to see Git in its natural element as a productivity tool.

Follow these steps to complete your first "Round Trip" update.

Step 1: Modify your file

Open your index.txt file (or whatever file you created) in your favorite text editor 
and add a new line of text. Save the file.

Alternatively, do it quickly from the terminal:
echo "This is my second update!" >> index.txt

Step 2: Check the "Delta"

Before you save, it’s a good habit to see exactly what Git noticed.

git status

Git will highlight your file in red, telling you that it has been "modified" but not yet "staged" for a snapshot.
Step 3: The Three-Step Dance

This is the sequence you will perform hundreds of times as a developer:

    Stage (The Shopping Cart):

git add .

Stage (The Shopping Cart):
Bash

git add .

Commit (The Receipt):
Bash

git commit -m "Added a second line to the text file"

Push (The Delivery):
Bash

    git push

    (Note: Since you used -u origin main earlier, you can now usually just type git push and Git will remember where to go!)

Step 4: Verify on GitHub

Go to your browser and refresh your GitHub repository page.

    You should see your new text inside the file.

    Next to the file name, you will see your new commit message: "Added a second line to the text file."

    You will see the commit counter go from 1 to 2.

Why this is powerful

If you realize tomorrow that your "second update" broke something, you can look at your Commit History and see exactly what changed between version 1 and version 2.
Pro-Tip: The "One-Liner"

For simple changes to files that Git is already tracking, you can combine the Add and Commit steps into one command:
Bash

git commit -am "My quick update message"

(The -a stands for "All" and -m for "Message".)

Would you like to learn how to create a .gitignore file? It’s a special file that tells Git to ignore "junk" files (like system logs or temporary files) so your GitHub stays clean.
This is my second update!
